---
layout: page
title: About
---

<p class="message">
  Hey there! This website is currently under construction. Please excuse
  the lack of content. You can find a short CV <a
  href="{{site.baseurl}}/assets/cv.pdf">here</a>.
</p>

I am a PhD candidate in computer science at ETHZ in Switzerland. I have a
background in *mathematics* and *theoretical computer science*.

My thesis work is in the field of computational neuroscience. The brain
can be thought of as a massively parallel computational machine. There
are multiple hypothesis of how the brain does computation. Many of them
are hard to test experimentally and the data we already have is
insufficient to make good predictions.

With difficulty obtaining data it thus becomes interesting to study
models. I find questions such as *"What are the necessary components to
build a brain?"* fascinating. Saying that my work is about understanding
the brain is a huge overstatement though. There is so little we
currently understand.

An easier and more concrete starting point is to study questions such
as:

* How can complexity arise from simple components?
* When a system is more than a sum of its parts can we understand why?

As an example one of the holy grails of such research is to find the so
called [*canonical
microcircuit*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cortical_column). This
circuit is believed to be the computational substrate of the brain. It
is conjectured to be quite small, perhaps in the order of 100.000
neurons or less. No one has so far managed to identify it or describe
it. It forms the basis of the columnar organisational hypothesis, that
our brain is made by stacking such circuits in parallel.

From my point of view it is thus interesting to study what properties we
need to build such a circuit starting from the most basic building
blocks. I plan to write a couple of blog posts about my work in this
direction. It is extremely far from producing anything resembling a
canonical microcircuit but it might yield some insight into what we can
achieve with only simple components and simple rules to connect them.

